{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2867
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red133\green0\blue2;\red9\green75\blue163;
\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cspthree\c54876\c10355\c6515;\cspthree\c15673\c37391\c67745;
\cspthree\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww34360\viewh18420\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 This chapter is part of the book Image Communication on Short Waves.\
\'a9 2012, Martin Bruchanov OK2MNM \'97 \cf3 http://www.sstv-handbook.com\
\cf2 Document version: November 13, 2025\

\fs165\fsmilli82630 4\

\fs61\fsmilli30984 Formats of slow-scan\
TV transmission\

\fs29\fsmilli14944 \cf4 4.1 Black and white SSTV systems\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The earlier modes of SSTV transmission were displayed on long persistent monitors\
with radar CRT. The duration of transmission for each image frame took 7.2 to 8\
seconds, and when the last line was received the first line was still visible. It was\
possible to see the whole picture in a darkened room.\
Both 7.2s and 8s modes were used in the same period. The 7.2 s frame speed\
mode, was used in Europe while the 8 s were used in America. The synchronization\
of signals is derived from the electrical mains \'96 50 or 60 Hz. If an image was\
synchronized at 60 Hz and received on 50 Hz equipment, it was still readable, but\
the image was a little distorted. For long-distance QSOs, it was possible to change\
the oscillator to achieve European or American synchronization.\
The disadvantages of 8s SSTV are low image resolution and a loss of synchronization\
due to signal interference. The loss of synchronization could lead to the\
loss of a few lines or the whole image.\
The differences between modern SSTV modes and this old system are many, but\
one parameter remains the same. Almost all new systems use 1200 Hz frequency\
for sync pulses and the frequency band from 1500 Hz (black) to 2300 Hz (white)\
for video signals. Also, the old 8s mode is still supported by many SSTV programs\
for transmission. It is important to note that the 8s mode has the shortest transfer\
time and should be used in special conditions.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.1.1 Modes for digital converters\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 There are many modes for B&W image transmission which differ in transfer time\
and resolution. Wrase and Robot modes are implemented in modern converters;\
the transfer is extended to 256 lines and the transmission time is also prolonged\
to achieve better horizontal resolution.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Historically common modes are the 16-second mode with 128 lines, the 32-second\
mode with 256 lines and the 64-second mode with 256 lines; which provides\
maximal image quality. All these modes are related to the original 8s mode and\
also have an image aspect ratio of 1:1. The number of lines, columns or both were\
simply multiplied twice. This design was used in Wraase's B&W converters.\
While Wraase's modes were derived from the European 7.2s mode, Robot Research\
developed an original system for their converters. Robot's modes aren't\
simply derived by \'93doubling\'94 parameters but are derived from line speed. While\
the American 60 Hz/8s standard has a transfer speed of 900.0 lpm, Robot's line\
speeds for new modes were set at 600.0 lpm so that 120 lines were transferred in\
12s and 240 lines in 24s. The mode with the best resolution has a line speed of\
400,0 lpm and a total transmission time of 36 seconds.\
The Robot SSTV system reserves the first 16 or 8 lines (for a 240 or 120 line\
image) for gradation grayscale. The scale can be used to tune the signal more\
precisely.\
Although Robot Research cooperated with Copthorne MacDonald, they ignored\
the trend in amateur construction of digital converters with doubled modes. Nevertheless,\
the Robot converter Robot 300 became quite popular despite the high\
price tag of over $800 in the mid-seventies.\
During the '70s and '80s, the ham radio market was not the only outlet for\
SSTV converters, but companies found opportunities in the telecommunication\
market and sold SSTV monitors and cameras as devices for image transmission\
over telephone lines.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.1.2 BW transmission with computer software\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 An example of B&W mode implemented with computers is the AVT 125 BW\
mode of the Amiga Video Transceiver system and it is suitable for good quality\
image transfer in circa 2 minutes. The mode has a vertical resolution of 200\
lines because the Amiga computer resolution was 320\'d7200. The AVT system is\
different from the previous B&W modes because it has no line sync like WEFAX.\
The transmission is based on a fully synchronous communication and the exact\
timing of corresponding stations. This special feature is described in more detail\
in \cf3 chapter 4.2.5 \cf2 about color AVT modes.\
There is also the FAX480 mode for the high-resolution transmission, with 512\'d7480\
image resolution described further in \cf3 chapter 4.3.1\cf2 .\
Early B&W modes Wraase and Robot, need to be synchronized with both line\
and vertical synchronization. The line speed describes the free-run speed, but in\
reality, it can be deviated up to \'b1 5 %.\
Modern modes like FAX480 and AVT 125 BW need accurate precision of line\
speed, because just a little deviation of values in tenths causes image slant and\
distortion.\
The advantage of longer transmission is improved image quality. The disadvantage\
is that a lot of time is needed for the transfer, which could be better utilized\
for the transmission of color images.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\
Mode Resolution Aspect ratio Sync. (ms) Scan line (ms) Line speed\
(lpm)\
7.2s (50 Hz) 120\'d7120 1:1 5.0 55.0 1000.0\
8s (60 Hz) 120\'d7120 1:1 5.0 60.0 900.0\
Wraase SC-1 8 128\'d7128 1:1 5.0 55.0 1000.0\
Wraase SC-1 16 256\'d7128 1:1 5.0 115.0 500.0\
Wraase SC-1 16 Q 128\'d7256 1:1 5.0 55.0 1000.0\
Wraase SC-1 32 256\'d7256 1:1 5.0 115.0 500.0\
64 s mode 256\'d7256 1:1 5.0 115.0 250.0\
Robot B&W 8 160\'d7120 4:3 10.0 56.0 900.0\
Robot B&W 12 160\'d7120 4:3 7.0 93.0 600.0\
Robot B&W 24 320\'d7240 4:3 12.0 93.0 600.0\
Robot B&W 36 320\'d7240 4:3 12.0 138.0 400.0\
AVT 125 320\'d7400 4:3 \'97 312.5 192.000\
FAX 480 512\'d7480 1:1 5.12 262.144 224.497\
SP-17 BW 128\'d7256 4:3 5.0 62.0 895.520\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.1: Parameters of black and white SSTV modes.\

\fs29\fsmilli14944 \cf4 4.2 Color SSTV modes\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 You might find it incredible that the first color transfer was made before the era of\
digital converters using long persistence monitors. Each color image channel was\
obtained using color filters, which were subsequently held in front of the camera. A\
sample result could be that the first channel transferred was blue, then green and\
the last red. Slightly more difficult was the processing on the receiver side. This\
was because each color channel had to be photographed from the monitor screen\
and then the resultant color picture was combined from all three components. It\
was a very laborious process, but it was put into practice a few times!\
Further experiments with color SSTV transmission were based on frame sequential\
transfer. Three complete images were transferred in 8s mode and each\
contained one color channel, together they formed one color image. During the\
broadcast, a color original was progressively scanned with a BW camera through\
each of the color filters. Received images had to be stored in a digital converter\
in three different memories. When simultaneously displayed on a color monitor\
they created a full-color image. This is the reason why BW modes of Robot and\
Wraase families have three different VIS codes for BW transfer. The codes are sent\
for adjustment of color components for frame-sequential transmission. Individual\
images were usually sent in the order of red \'96 green \'96 blue. But the order of the\
channels could be changed under the agreement of corresponding stations, or some
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Robot B&W 8 Robot B&W 12\
Robot B&W 24 Robot B&W 36\
Figure 4.1: Comparison of Robot system's BW modes.\
images could be broadcast repeatedly. With such a method, it is possible to transfer\
only static scenes. If an object moves during manual scanning of an image, the\
color components do not correspond and the resulting image has colored ghosts.\
The transfer was not always reliable; due to interference and fade-outs, the\
image component had to be sent several times. And in practice, it was sometimes\
problematic to complete all color channels. To improve color transmission the line\
sequential transfer was developed. The principle is that it transmits a single image\
and each scan-line carries all three color components. Receiving equipment can\
already display color images during transmission. This method where the color\
image is transferred in one frame is referred to as SFC \'96 Single Frame color.\
More properties of SSTV systems will be introduced in following sections, with\
all their pros and cons and details of mode formats described in detail.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.1 Wraase SC-1\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 This line sequential system was first among newly developed SFC systems. Wraase\
SC-1 comes from the workshop of famous SSTV engineer Volker Wraase, DL2RZ.\
The system was most likely created by modifying existing equipment to operate\
in 8s mode or for frame-sequential transmission.\
Each scan-line begins with 6.0ms sync, then a green component follows and then\
the blue and red components. Separate sync of 6.0 ms length precedes each color\
component.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Wraase SC-1 has a major deficiency. If the receiver loses sync during interference,\
then the display system loses the ability to synchronize colors. Because all\
lines are sent in the same way, the color components cannot be recognized and\
the probability that the system reverts to correct color sync is equal to one-third.\
In practice, the system works, but when the noise level is too high, the received\
image contains few color bands as the converter loses and restores synchronization.\
For this reason, an additional sync pulse was added to subsequent productions of\
the SC-1 converter. It consists of a truncated 5ms sync before the red line, which\
is immediately followed by a short pulse of 2300 Hz frequency lasting 1-2 ms. It\
allows the converter to regain synchronization after the noise subsides. Additional\
synchronization occurs as a thin red stripe in the left edge of the image.\
All SC-1 modes have an image aspect ratio of 1 : 1. The original SC-1 mode is\
the 24s mode with 128 lines, so the image quality is not better than the 8s mode,\
but the colors improve the picture.\
The system was soon upgraded for modes with the longer transmission. First,\
the number of lines was doubled to 256 and the transfer extended to 48 seconds.\
The last SC-1 96s mode has a better horizontal resolution for good image quality.\
The professional converter Wraase Electronics SC-1 was most popular in Germany,\
but its market share was lower in comparison to the Robot converters\
produced in the same period.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync G B Speed\
R (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Wraase SC-1 24 Color 24 s 128\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 6.0 54.0 54.0 54.0 333.3\
Wraase SC-1 48Q Color 48 s 256\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 6.0 108.0 108.0 108.0 175.4\
Wraase SC-1 48 Color 48 s 128\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 6.0 54.0 54.0 54.0 333.3\
Wraase SC-1 96 Color 96 s 256\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 6.0 108.0 108.0 108.0 175.4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.2: The Wraase SC-1 scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.2 Robot color system\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The Robot modes are named according to the converters in which they were implemented.\
They are scan-converters Robot 400C, 450C and 1200C. They were\
produced in San Diego by Robot Research Inc.\
They do not use RGB color coding as SC-1, but YCrCb. Scan-lines consist of a\
luminance signal \uc0\u55349 \u56396  followed by differential chrominance signals \u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  and \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396 .\
Due to this, the color modes are compatible with their B&W variants. So a 12s\
color mode can be displayed by 8s monitors, etc.\
From a total of 8 modes, 4 are intended for color transmission. Half of the color\
modes use YCrCb in a 4:2:0 format. The scan-line contains only one chrominance\
signal, and colors are obtained from the average of two adjacent lines in the original\
image. The other two modes use the 4:2:2 format and send all color information\
in one scan-line.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 The original Robot system uses asynchronous transfer. To receive the image, it\
is needed to detect the vertical sync (VIS code). And for proper reception of the\
image, the sync pulse must be detected. This process is a major disadvantage.\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1200\
0 50 100 150 200 250 300\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Two scan-lines of Robot 36 Color when color bars\
Figure 4.2: are sent.\
The scan-line is composed of the starting sync, followed by a short 3.0ms gap of\
1500 Hz and then the image part with luminance and chrominance. The chrominance\
differential signals begin with additional sync pulses. The 1500Hz sync is\
before \uc0\u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  and the second 2300Hz is before \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  . Due to the additional sync\
with a different sync frequency, it is possible to re-synchronize 4 : 2 : 0 formats after\
an interruption. The chrominance syncs are separated from the scan-line with\
1500Hz gap that lasts 1.5 ms.\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1200\
0 50 100 150 200 250 300\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The scan-line of Robot 72 Color when the color\
Figure 4.3: bars are sent.\
The main disadvantage of the Robot modes lies in color-coding because the receiver\
must be perfectly tuned to the SSTV signal. Otherwise, the image hue\
is distorted when the deviation is greater than \'b150 Hz. For this reason, Robot
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Research introduced the transmission of a gray gradation scale at the beginning\
of image transfer and the receiver device can auto-tune for a video signal.\
The whole frame has 256 or 128 lines, of which the first 16 or 8 lines are reserved\
just for gradation scale. Some converters and PC software add some basic station\
info, such as call sign, and this part of the frame is called \'93header\'94.\
The memory storage capacity of the Robot 1200C converter allows it to store\
an image with a resolution 256\'d7240 pixels or four images with 128\'d7120, and they\
are displayed in a 4 : 3 aspect ratio.\
The fastest mode of the Robot family and the fastest color SSTV mode is the\
12s mode. It contains 120 lines transmitted in the 4:2:0 format. Another mode is\
24s with a 256\'d7120 resolution and 4:2:2 color format. The other two modes allow\
the transfer of images in 256\'d7240 resolution, either in less quality for 36 seconds\
in a 4:2:0 format or in better quality in 4 : 2 : 2 format for 72 seconds.\
Robot 12 Color Robot 24 Color\
Robot 36 Color Robot 72 Color\
Figure 4.4: Comparison of Robot color modes.\
Although the Robot modes were pushed away by modern synchronous modes that\
are more resistant to interference, the 24s and 36s modes are faster than modes\
with RGB color coding and have better resolution than RGB modes with the same\
transmission time. You can find their benefits on VHF with FM transmission\
because it eliminates the need for precise tuning.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Robot 36 Color was used in MAREX
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 1
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 , SAREX
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 2 
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 and ARISS
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 3 
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 programs for SSTV\
transmission from orbital stations Mir, ISS and space shuttle missions. It is a\
pretty good compromise between image quality and transfer time, because space\
stations on low earth orbit can be received within just 10 minutes during their\
orbit.\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Mode name Transfer time Resolution Color format Compatible\
B&W mode\
Robot 12 Color 12 s 160\'d7120 4 : 2 :0 Robot B&W 8\
Robot 24 Color 24 s 320\'d7120 4 : 2 :2 Robot B&W 12\
Robot 36 Color 36 s 320\'d7240 4 : 2 :0 Robot B&W 24\
Robot 72 Color 72 s 320\'d7240 4 : 2 :2 Robot B&W 36\
Mode name Color sequence Sync pulses of Scan-line line color color Y R\uc0\u8722 Y B\u8722 Y Speed\
(lpm)\
Robot 12 Color YCrCb 7.0 3.0 \'97 60 30 600.0\
Robot 24 Color YCrCb 12.0 6.0 6.0 88 44 44 300.0\
Robot 36 Color YCrCb 10.5 4.5 \'97 90 45 400.0\
Robot 72 Color YCrCb 12.0 6.0 6.0 138 69 69 200.0\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.3: The Robot parameters and scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.3 The Martin synchronous system\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The creator of this popular system is Martin Emmerson, G3OQD. He originally\
named it \'93New Modes\'94, but to avoid confusion between other newly emerging\
SSTV modes, the community universally named modes after their creators. The\
Martin was created to overcome SFC problems in systems like SC-1 due to two\
main changes.\
The first change was that instead of three separate syncs before each color\
component, there is just single sync sent before each scan-line. The horizontal\
sync lasts 4.862 ms. After the horizontal sync, the green component is sent, then\
blue and last is the red component. Between each color component, there are short\
gaps of 1500 Hz lasting 0.572 ms. Just like in the SC-1, the sequence green \'96 blue \'96\
red was chosen. Regardless of the order in which components are sent, the image\
quality will not change. But it is important that the receiving device identifies\
which component is being currently received.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 1 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Mir Amateur Radio Experiment\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 2 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 3 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\
\cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1200\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Figure 4.5: 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf5 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Scan-line of Martin M1 when color bars are sent.\
An important feature of using only one sync before beginning the color scan-line\
sequence is that a converter will not replace the individual color components and\
degrade the color information. In time intervals where the line sync is not transmitted,\
the gaps are filled with a reference level of black at 1500 Hz for 0.572 ms.\
The second improvement has a substantial effect on image reception. Unlike\
the Robot or SC-1, the detection of horizontal syncs is not necessary during the\
reception. And the broadcast between stations is fully synchronized. The results\
of the use of such a system are sharper images and more contrasted edges. Although\
the transmission conditions on the lower HF bands often do not allow the\
transfer of the image in 100% quality, old systems relying on line sync usually lose\
synchronization in such conditions.\
The Martin system was originally implemented as a modification of the Robot\
1200C converter and it preserves the transmission of the header gradation scale.\
Robot 36s Color Martin M1\
A comparison of systems in real conditions on the\
Figure 4.6: 3.7MHz band.\
Line syncs and inner scan-line gaps have a similar duration at all four speeds, but\
the number of lines and horizontal resolution for each mode is different. Although
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 the syncs aren't necessary for transmission, they are still transmitted at the beginning\
of each scan-line in order to synchronize the converter at any time during\
the reception. It is important because it consumes a lot of broadcast time and the\
station does not have to wait for the start of a new frame, but a receiver can get\
synchronization at any time during transmission.\
The Martin system allows us to work with four different modes/speeds. The\
most popular version is the Martin M1 with 256 lines per frame in two minutes.\
Other modes of the Martin system have either half the line or half the horizontal\
resolution of the best quality M1. The mode M4 has the lowest quality and 128\
lines. Modes Martin M1 and M2 are often used between European stations.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync G B Speed\
R (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Martin M1 114 s 320\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 4.862 146.432 146.432 146.432 134.3947532\
Martin M2 58 s 160\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 4.862 73.216 73.216 73.216 264.5525975\
Martin M3 57 s 320\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 4.862 146.432 146.432 146.432 134.3947532\
Martin M4 29 s 160\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 4.862 73.216 73.216 73.216 264.5525975\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.4: The Martin scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.4 Scottie\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 These modes were created by Eddie T. J. Murphy, GM3SBC. He modified the\
original firmware of Wraase SC-1. Martin Emmerson also implemented Scottie\
modes to Robot 1200C later on.\
Scottie has the same improvements as the Martin system does, but its scan-line\
composition and scan timing are different.\
After vertical synchronization, the sequence of scan-lines is; a 1.5ms short gap\
of 1500 Hz, then a green component, a 1.5ms short gap again, a blue component,\
then horizontal sync, another gap and lastly, a red component. This unusual\
order is the result of the system adaptation to SC-1, where the additional sync\
was used right before the red component. Syncs are permanently sent for any time\
synchronization during the reception.\
The Scottie relies on exact timing like the Martin, although the original version\
for SC-1 was not fully synchronous and syncs were still processed by the converter.\
But in newer systems the modes are implemented for free-run reception, so the\
system is equivalent to the Martin.\
The implementation of Scottie in Robot 1200C slightly differs because the first\
scan-line includes an additional 9.0ms sync at the beginning of the scan-line right\
after vertical synchronization. All other modes implemented in Robot 1200C have\
sync at the beginning of the scan-line but the Scottie has the sync in the middle of\
the scan-line which then caused color distortion. Perhaps some other implementation\
of Scottie has this difference too.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 The Scottie system also has four conventional modes (and a special one described\
later). Two with 256 lines per frame and two with 128 lines. The difference in\
timing is not the same as in the Martin, where the line speed of the faster mode\
is exactly twice the speed of the slower mode, so the speed of the faster mode is\
lower than twice that of the slower mode.\
Image quality in the Scottie and Martin modes is the same. Theoretically,\
slightly better quality can be achieved in Martin M1 than in Scottie S1 due to\
longer transmission, but the difference is imperceptible.\
The Scottie S1 and S2 are quite popular for North American stations and can\
often be heard on high-frequency bands.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.4.1 Scottie DX \'96 special mode for long-distance transfers\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 This mode of the Scottie family achieves the best possible results in the transmission\
of slow-scan television images. There is one simple reason for this; the\
transmission takes about 2.5 times longer than Scottie S1.\
There is an extended duration of the scan-line, but the duration of sync and gaps\
between color components remained the same. This improvement is best seen on\
the receiving side. The longer transmission time supports better image quality.\
The improvement relies on the fact that; each pixel can be read more times\
during signal sampling and that the loss of a few samples does not affect the\
overall quality. It means that each pixel takes a long time and this gives better\
noise and phase distortion immunity. But these qualities are compensated by a\
very long image transmission time of about 4.5 minutes. During this time, two\
images with the same resolution can be sent with other RGB modes.\
The Scottie DX mode offers high-quality images, but sometimes the optimal\
conditions for DX connections do not last long enough for the transfer of a whole\
picture.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync G B Speed\
R (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Scottie S1 110 s 320\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 9.0 138.240 138.240 138.240 140.1148942\
Scottie S2 71 s 160\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 9.0 88.064 88.064 88.064 216.0667214\
Scottie S3 55 s 320\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 9.0 138.240 138.240 138.240 140.1148942\
Scottie S4 36 s 160\'d7128 G\'96B\'96R 9.0 88.064 88.064 88.064 216.0667214\
Scottie DX 269 s 320\'d7256 G\'96B\'96R 9.0 345.600 345.600 345.600 57.12653528\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.5: The Scottie scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.5 Amiga Video Transceiver\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 AVT modes were originally intended for SSTV operations with Amiga computers.\
AVT author Ben B. Williams, AA7AS developed a dedicated interface and software\
which was produced by AEA (Advanced Electronic Applications Inc.). Although
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 the creator claimed that this system was a revolution in SSTV transmission, these\
modes did not gain popularity like other modes. The AVT modes are practically\
not in use today.\
A reason for this could be the fact that the manufacturer wanted to keep the\
image scan parameters of the system, secret. However, by intercepting signals and\
reverse engineering, the parameters of the AVT modes were implemented in other\
devices by the SSTV community. This was done without the additional software\
tools that made the AVT unique.\
The AVT system contains four of line sequential RGB modes and one B&W.\
The scan-lines have no gaps between color components and a really unusual thing\
is that; the modes do not use any horizontal sync. Another unusual feature is the\
mandatory function of vertical synchronization, that is sent as a digital header\
before the image transfer begins.\
The AVT family contains 5 modes and each of them has the following four\
options:\
1. Default variant is the same as conventional SSTV modes, but does not have\
any line syncs.\
2. Narrowband variant uses a shorter band for video signals from 1700 Hz for black\
to 2100 Hz for white.\
3. 4. QRM variant, that uses picture interlacing just like in analog television.\
The combination of the QRM and narrowband variant.\
The fastest mode is the AVT 24 with 120 lines and it is transferred for 31 seconds.\
The next mode is AVT 90 with a resolution of 256\'d7240 and an image quality\
slightly worse than in the Martin M1. ATV 90 sends each color component in\
125.0 ms, thus the speed is 2048 pixels per second (in binary notation this gives a\
nice rounded number). The other two modes have somewhat atypical resolutions\
in comparison with other SSTV modes, but these resolutions are normal system\
resolutions on Amiga computers. It is AVT 94 with 320\'d7200 and AVT 188 with\
the same line speed, but twice the scan-lines \'96 320\'d7400. The image is displayed\
in an aspect ratio of 4 : 3 in both cases.\
For some SSTV systems/scan-converters, the detection of vertical sync is a must.\
So, the VIS code is repeated three times for accurate reception. VIS is necessary\
for image reception when no line sync is sent and later synchronization is not\
possible. The original AVT software does not need to receive VIS but relies more\
on the digital header.\
After a series of VIS code, there is a digital header (see \cf3 fig. 4.7\cf2 ), which contains\
synchronization data. It is a sequence of 32 frames of 16 bits. Each frame contains\
only 8 bits of information, but it is sent twice \'96 first in normal form and second\
inverted. Normal and inverted parts can be compared for error detection. Each\
frame starts with a 1900Hz pulse while data modulation uses 1600 Hz for the\
representation of logical zeros and 2200 Hz for logical ones. Narrow-band variants\
use 1700 Hz for zeros and 2100 Hz for ones. Both variants use a modulation speed\
of exactly 2048/20 = 102.4 Bd, so the data pulse has a length of 9.766 ms.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\
\cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1200\
3400 3600 3800 4000 4200 4400\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The digital synchronization header of AVT 90 mode\
Figure 4.7: (VIS 68, normal variant).\
The first three bit of each 8bit word identifies the mode:\
\uc0\u8883  010 \'96 AVT 24,\
\uc0\u8883  011 \'96 AVT 94, AVT 188, AVT 125 BW,\
\uc0\u8883  101 \'96 AVT 90.\
The last five bits are used as a count down before image transmission. These\
five bits are important for an accurate set of image initiation and synchronization.\
They vary between all 32 binary combinations during transmission. At least one\
binary code must be properly detected. In the beginning, all bits are in 0 states\
with 1 in inverted parts. When the countdown starts, all five-bit sequences run\
(e.g. for AVT 24):\
010 00000 101 11111\
010 00001 101 11110\
010 00010 101 11101\
\'85\
010 11101 101 00010\
010 11110 101 00001\
010 11111 101 00000\
When the count down gets to zero, the image scan-lines are sent. AVT reception\
depends on the first eight seconds of synchronization, for some implementations\
without the ability to synchronize later. Although the AVT modes are quite\
reliable, noise could cause a loss of the whole image. Sometimes it is not possible to\
receive a digital header due to interference, even if the interference later disappears.\
However, the original AVT software was capable of image reconstruction in this\
case. Because the image data is completely synchronous, the data simply has to\
be shifted in memory until the RGB data is aligned correctly, and then the image\
comes out perfectly. Again, the AVT system provided means to hot reconfigure\
the data after the reception. So reception without/after sync header worked fine.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 The earlier listed options for each mode can improve its performance. The first\
is the narrow-band transmission which uses a 400 Hz band from 1700 Hz (black)\
to 2100 Hz (white). With an appropriate filter, the resistance to interference can\
be improved with minimal loss of image quality. For instance; the 400 Hz wide\
CW filter can be used with a variable IF shift.\
The second option is the \'93QRM mode\'94, where an entire image is sent interlaced.\
Within the first half of image transmission time, half of the scan lines (every odd\
one) is sent. Then the scan loops back to the beginning and sends the remaining\
half of lines (even lines). The fact that some of the distorted lines of the first\
field are interlaced with fine lines received from the second will improve the overall\
subjective impression of image quality. The original AVT software also contains\
tools for handy image improvement \'96 it is possible to select distorted lines and\
the program will reconstruct them by averaging neighborhood lines. It is also is\
possible to shift the second field horizontally independently of the first field. This\
allows you to compensate if there is a significant multi-path delay in regard to the\
two fields.\
In ATV implementations, the system can work well without these interactive\
tools. But in practice, especially on shortwaves where conditions change quickly;\
the second field could be phase-shifted and this causes the notable \'93toothy\'94 edge\
of the picture. The QRM option can be combined with the narrow-band mode.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync R G Speed\
B (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 AVT 24 31 s 128\'d7120 R\'96G\'96B \'97 62.5 62.5 62.5 960.000\
AVT 90 98 s 256\'d7240 R\'96G\'96B \'97 125.0 125.0 125.0 480.000\
AVT 94 102 s 320\'d7200 R\'96G\'96B \'97 156.25 156.25 156.25 384.000\
AVT 188 196 s 320\'d7400 R\'96G\'96B \'97 156.25 156.25 156.25 384.000\
AVT 125 BW 133 s 320\'d7400 Y \'97 312.5 192.000\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.6: The AVT scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.2.6 Wraase SC-2\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 A later version of Wraase modes was first built in the newer converter SC-2 from\
Wraase Electronics. Again, it provides another variant of line sequential systems.\
The author dropped the sequence of colors used in the earlier SC-1 converter, so\
the colors are now sent in the order: red \'96 green \'96 blue. Additionally, there is\
only one horizontal sync at the beginning of each line, just as in the Scottie and\
Martin.\
Unlike other systems, the RGB system in the SC-2 has one characteristic that\
distinguishes it from other conventional modes. Image transfer is achieved when\
the transmission time for the green component is equal to the sum of the transmission\
time of the red and blue components, i.e. the ratio 2 : 4 : 2 of R : G : B\
components. Between color components, short gaps are not sent.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 As we already know that the human eye is most sensitive to green by more than\
50 %. The remaining 50 % in SC-2 is split evenly between the red and blue components.\
Red and blue components are not processed for a differential signal. This\
color reduction is not visible on common pictures, but it may happen that some\
images (e.g. B&W mosaic) may lose color information. The system is less precise\
for color interpretation in comparison with YCrCb modes but better in tuning resistance.\
One disadvantage of color reduction is found when green shadows appear\
on the image in stations without precise clock timing.\
This mode is preferable in comparison to YCrCb because bad tuning will only\
reduce the contrast or saturation, but the hue is not distorted. Occasional green\
shadows remain as a tax for reduced transmission time.\
The Wraase SC-2 family just like all other systems also has four different modes.\
The SC-2 180 offers the best quality for three-minute transmission, and unlike the\
previous modes does not use the RGB ratio 2 : 4 : 2 and is, therefore, a faster\
alternative to the Scottie DX mode. The two-minute SC-2 120 uses the RGB\
format 2 : 4 : 2. The remaining two modes, SC-2 30 with 128 and SC-2 60 with 256\
lines have about half of the resolution found in SC-2 120.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync R G Speed\
B (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Wraase SC-2 30 30 256\'d7128 R\'96G\'96B 5.0 58.0 117.0 58.0 249.600\
Wraase SC-2 60 60 256\'d7256 R\'96G\'96B 5.0 58.0 117.0 58.0 249.600\
Wraase SC-2 120 120 320\'d7256 R\'96G\'96B 5.0 117.0 235.0 117.0 126.175\
Wraase SC-2 180 180 512\'d7256 R\'96G\'96B 5.0 235.0 235.0 235.0 84.383\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.7: Wraase SC-2 scan-line timing.\

\fs29\fsmilli14944 \cf4 4.3 High resolution transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 High-quality images consume a lot of memory but memory was very expensive\
in early computer systems. High-resolution images were a real luxury, but over\
the years memory has gotten cheaper, therefore modern SSTV systems now have\
modes for high resolution broadcast too.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.3.1 FAX480\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The synchronous mode was the first high-resolution mode. It was first implemented\
in the ViewPort VGA interface and software for IBM PCs in 1993. The old VGA\
cards with 256 kB of memory can hold an image with a resolution 640\'d7480 with\
only 16 colors. This provides only grayscale images, so this mode is used for only\
B&W transmission.\
The image resolution of FAX480 is 512\'d7480 and the transmission time is 138\
seconds. In the early days of high resolution transmission, the only way to transmit\
hi-res images was facsimile mode (see \cf3 chapter 11\cf2 ). So the creator Ralph Taggart,
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 WB8DQT called it FAX480, but compared with classic facsimile there are not\
many similarities.\
The synchronization of the FAX480 is derived from the reference frequency of\
4.0 MHz, and a time unit is 4 MHz/2048 = 1953.125 Hz.\
Vertical sync is resolved as follows. In the first five seconds a rectangular frequency\
modulation of 244 Hz between the black (1500 Hz) and white (2300 Hz)\
levels is transmitted. This creates the APT
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 4 
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 signal.\
The tone 1500 Hz is transmitted for 4 time units (4 \'d7 [1/1953.125] = 2.048 ms)\
and 2300 Hz for 2.048 ms too. This gives a frequency of an ATP tone also 244 Hz\
(1/[2.048 + 2.048] = 244 Hz). This sequence is then repeated exactly 1,220\'d7.\
Originally the system did not use the VIS code, but the code 85 was later added.\
Originally, vertical sync is followed by a phasing interval of 20 white lines. Each\
begins with 5.12 ms sync 1200 Hz (10-time units), but this interval is omitted in\
some implementations.\
Now it's time to transfer the image itself. It is composed of 480 lines. Each\
line begins, unlike the facsimile, with 1200Hz sync with a length of 5.12 ms and\
then continues a scan-line with 512 pixels. The duration of the scan-line is 512 \'d7\
(1/1953.125) = 262.144 ms.\
According to the creator, the horizontal resolution of 512 points was selected\
just because the FAX480 operating software had a control menu to the left of the\
screen.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.3.2 Pasokon TV\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 These synchronous modes were released with Pasokon TV interface from John\
Langer, WB5OSZ. These modes retain essential SSTV parameters. They also\
used color-coding to transmit the individual color components in the order of\
red \'96 green \'96 blue with the format 1 : 1 : 1.\
There are three modes in the Pasokon system. They have different transmission\
times: 3, 5 or 7 minutes, so the image quality differs.\
Each mode has a default timing for scan-lines:\
\uc0\u8883  Pasokon P3 \'854800 Hz\
\uc0\u8883  Pasokon P5 \'853200 Hz\
\uc0\u8883  Pasokon P7 \'852400 Hz\
The scan-line starts with a sync pulse of 20 time units, then there is a 5 unit\
black gap followed by the red component. It has 640 units, so there is one unit for\
each pixel. There are 5 unit black gaps between color components and at the end\
of the scan-line before the sync of the next line. These gaps should help improve\
the detection of syncs.\
Pasokon P7 has the best image quality and longest transmission time which\
takes nearly seven minutes. If we split such an image into four equal parts, the\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 4 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Automatic Picture Transmission signal, see \cf3 section 11.2.1\cf2 .
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 image quality of one of them would correspond to that produced by the Martin M1\
or Scottie S1 modes. The upper 16 lines are used for gray scale and the remaining\
480 for your the image itself.\
There are also two other modes with 480+16 lines. The P5 has a transfer time\
of almost 5 minutes with lower image quality and the P3 runs fastest at three\
minutes with a horizontal resolution about half of a P7.\
A potential disadvantage of these modes is quite a long transfer time, which\
makes it difficult to use on highly variable short-waves. For those who do not\
mind the long transmission times, it can be used for exchanging pictures on VHF.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync R G Speed\
B (lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Pasokon P3 203 s 320\'d7496 R\'96G\'96B 5.208 133.333 133.333 133.333 146.56488550\
Pasokon P5 305 s 640\'d7496 R\'96G\'96B 7.813 200.000 200.000 200.000 97.70992366\
Pasokon P7 406 s 640\'d7496 R\'96G\'96B 10.417 266.667 266.667 266.667 73.28244275\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.8: The Pasokon TV scan-line timing.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.3.3 PD modes\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 PD modes are the result of a cooperation between Paul Turner G4IJE and Don\
Rotier K0HEO. The mode was first introduced in May 1996 and it was developed\
to improve image quality and especially to reduce transfer times in comparison\
with Pasokon TV.\
For speeding up the transmission, YCrCb color coding is used in the 4 : 2 : 0\
format. If you divide the total time between two syncs by four, the result is the\
actual time for each color component. The scan-line begins with 20.0ms sync, then\
there is a 2,080 ms gap of black, and the first luminance signal \uc0\u55349 \u56396 
\fs16\fsmilli8369 1
\fs23\fsmilli11955 . It is followed by\
chrominance signals \uc0\u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  and \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  without any gap. Then there is a second\
luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396 
\fs16\fsmilli8369 2
\fs23\fsmilli11955 . The exact timing of modes is:\
\uc0\u8883  PD-50 \'96 286\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-90 \'96 532\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-120 \'96 190\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-160 \'96 382\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-180 \'96 286\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-240 \'96 382\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
\uc0\u8883  PD-290 \'96 286\u55349 \u57095 s/pixel\
YCrCb color coding needs accurate signal tuning to prevent color distortion.\
Thanks to wide horizontal sync, it is possible to detect frequency deviation and\
compensate color distortion. There is also the gray scale on the top of the image\
for tuning detection.\
The main advantage is reduced transmission time compared with RGB modes.\
The PD-290 mode supports a resolution of 800\'d7600 and its transfer time is nearly\
five minutes, although at the cost of little color loss. Some modes have resolutions\
of 640\'d7480, while PD-160 has 512\'d7384. The fastest two-minute PD-120 has a\
worse image quality, but in many cases, it is still sufficient. Besides the five modes
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 with high-resolution, the system includes two with standard resolution. PD-90 uses\
320\'d7240 and has a better image quality than Martin M1 or Scottie S1, because it\
is based on a longer transmission time per pixel. The last mode is the very fast\
PD-50, which provides a similar resolution as Scottie S2.\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
Color sequence Scan line (ms) Sync \uc0\u55349 \u56396 
\fs11\fsmilli5579 1, 2 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  Speed\
(lpm)\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 PD-50 50 s 320\'d7240 Y-C 20.0 91.520 91.520 91.520 309.150866\
PD-90 90 s 320\'d7240 Y-C 20.0 170.240 170.240 170.240 170.687301\
PD-120 126 s 640\'d7480 Y-C 20.0 121.600 121.600 121.600 235.997483\
PD-160 161 s 512\'d7384 Y-C 20.0 195.854 195.854 195.854 149.176545\
PD-180 187 s 640\'d7480 Y-C 20.0 183.040 183.040 183.040 159.100552\
PD-240 248 s 640\'d7480 Y-C 20.0 244.480 244.480 244.480 120.000000\
PD-290 289 s 800\'d7600 Y-C 20.0 228.800 228.800 228.800 128.030044\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.9: The PD modes scan-line timing.\

\fs29\fsmilli14944 \cf4 4.4 Experimental modes\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 During the years of the SSTV boom many modes were created, but never gained\
popularity. Many of them are totally forgotten, like WinPix GVA, Proscan J-120,\
WA7WOD system or ScanMate, although some of them have a few interesting\
features which we are about to delve into.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.4.1 MSCAN TV\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The modes TV-1 and TV-2 were one of many experiments in the SSTV transmission\
field. An interesting feature is the use of interlaced transmission. They do\
not use the same half-frame interlacing like normal television does. But the whole\
image is divided into four quarter-frames. These frames are transmitted gradually\
in the direction from top to bottom, so you can get a first preview of the image\
after the first quarter of transmission time, but only in low resolution. Thanks to\
interlacing, the resolution increases gradually during transmission up to 320\'d7256.\
It is possible to receive these modes with conventional equipment without interlacing\
support, because of their line speed are the same as for Wraase SC-180\
(TV-1) and Martin M1 (TV-2) modes. But in this condition, the image will contain\
four bars with all quarter-frames.\
1. 2. 3. 4.\
Figure 4.8: MSCAN TV image interlacing.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.4.2 Kenwood FAST FM\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 This mode is built in the mobile SSTV converter Visual Comunicator VC-H1 from\
Kenwood (see \cf3 section 6.7\cf2 ). This unit support some normal modes and the \'93FAST\
FM\'94 mode.\
The FAST FM mode sends video signals in the 2800 Hz (black) to 4400 Hz\
(white) band. The vertical synchronization and VIS code format are similar to\
Robot's standard, it has a value of 90 but uses odd parity (the number of logical\
ones must be odd). After the VIS code there is a digital header and then an image\
with a resolution of 320\'d7240.\
The duration of one scan-line is 53.6 ms, so the total transmission time for an\
image is 13.5 seconds. The mode uses YCrCb color coding in the 4 : 2 : 0 format.\
The brightness signal occupies 35.4 ms of scan-line, and than there is a pulse of\
3600 Hz that lasts 0.41 ms and then color signals are sent. Each even scan-line\
contains \uc0\u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  and odd line \u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  . The scan-line is ended by 0.41 ms pulse again.\
The transmission of a whole image is ended by a one-second pulse of 1900 Hz.\
Due to fast transmission, the used bandwidth of FAST FM is in 1.0 to 6.2 kHz\
range, so it cannot be used in the SSB voice channel, but only in FM channels on\
VHF. The image quality is comparable to the Robot 36 Color mode.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.4.3 Modes MP, MR, ML\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 These modes were created by Makoto Mori, JE3HHT, the author of MMSSTV\
software. Some of these modes became quite popular, because of the success of\
MMSSTV. The author created modes with both standard and high resolutions.\
They use YCrCb colors and extended VIS code. Some modes use a narrower band\
for syncs and video signals.\
Martin M1 MP115\
The comparison of modes in real conditions on the\
Figure 4.9: 3.7MHz band.\
The change he made to the traditional VIS specification extends the code by 8\
extra bits, so a 16-bit code is sent instead. The first 8 bits (LSB) are the same\
for each mode with a value of 35 (0x23) that identifies the system. While the
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 remaining bits (MSB) distinguish a particular mode. Odd parity is used as a\
simple check.\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1300\
1200\
1100\
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Figure 4.10: The 16-bit VIS code\
of MP115 mode with a 0x2923 value.\
VIS used in narrowband modes has very little in common with the original standard.\
Initially, during vertical synchronization N-VIS pulses of 1900Hz and 2300Hz\
in 100 ms are sent, followed by a start bit of 1900 Hz (see fig. ??).\
All code bits have a duration of 22 ms (modulation speed is 45.45 Bd). Logic\
one has 1900 Hz and logic zero 2100 Hz. The code word length is 24 bits and it is\
divided into four groups of 6 bits, bits are sent in the following order:\
Each group has the following meaning:\
\uc0\u8883  Group 0 (5\'960) = 101101\
\uc0\u8883  Group 1 (15\'9610) = 010101\
\uc0\u8883  Group 2 (25\'9620) = N-VIS\
\uc0\u8883  Group 3 (35\'9630) = 010101 xor N-VIS\
For example, MP73-N has N-VIS = 000010 (0x02) and the whole code word is:\
101101 010101 000010 010111.\
MP modes use the same principle as PD modes. The sync takes 9.0 ms followed\
by a short 1500 Hz gap of 1.0 ms, then odd scan-line \uc0\u55349 \u56396  brightness is sent followed\
by the \uc0\u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  and \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  chrominance signals. The chrominance signals are the\
average of two neighborhood scan-lines. The scan-line is ended by the even \uc0\u55349 \u56396 \
luminance signal. This sequence is repeated 128\'d7.\
MP modes also have narrowband variants (MPxx-N) and their video signals\
occupy frequencies from 2044 to 2300 Hz.\
The MR and ML modes use YCrCb color coding in 4 : 2 : 2 format, same as the\
Robot 72 Color mode. Horizontal syncs are the same as in MP modes. The scan-\
line begins with luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396  , then 0.1 ms gap is sent followed by \u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  , a gap,\
and \uc0\u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  , the line then ends with a 0.1ms gap. These gaps should have the same\
frequency as the last pixel of the previous color component. The MLxx group has\
a high resolution of 640\'d7496.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\

\fs17\fsmilli8966 \cf5 2300\
2044 2100\
1900\
Frequency
\fs19\fsmilli9963 f 
\fs17\fsmilli8966 [Hz]\
1500\
1200\
0 500 1000 1500 2000\
Time
\fs19\fsmilli9963 t 
\fs17\fsmilli8966 [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Vertical synchronization and scan-line of the MP110-N\
Figure 4.11: narrowband mode.\
The MC-N modes are narrowband, but they use RGB color coding. Horizontal\
pulses last 8.0 ms and are followed by a 0.5 ms gap of 2044 Hz. The order of color\
components is red \'96 green \'96 blue.\

\fs25\fsmilli12951 \cf4 4.4.4 Martin HQ\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 The Martin HQ system from Martin Emmerson's workshop was released at the\
end of 1996. These modes were developed for Robot 1200C, SUPERSCAN 2001\
and other compatible converters with the EPROM version 4.6, or 1.6. Unlike\
previous Martin modes, they use YCrCb color coding. The transmission time of\
chrominance signals is half of the luminance (format 4 : 2 : 2). There are 6 signals\
sent between two doubled syncs. The first three signals create an odd scan-line:\
luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396  , \u55349 \u56389  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  , \u55349 \u56373  \u8722  \u55349 \u56396  . And the next three signals contain even scan-line:\
luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396  , \u55349 \u56396  \u8722  \u55349 \u56389 , \u55349 \u56396  \u8722  \u55349 \u56373 . The opposite \'93polarity\'94 of chrominance compensates\
for possible color distortion when signals are not tuned precisely. The HQ1 mode\
has 90 seconds for image transmission and HQ2 has 112 seconds, both use 256\
vertical lines.\
I had once QSO on 20m with the station equipped also with the Superscan 2001\
scan-converter and we were able to exchange a few pictures in HQ1 mode and the\
quality was outstanding.\
In the early 2000s, Martin developed a new SSTV interface for IBM PCs called\
ACE SSTV and added two additional modes, HQ3 and HQ4. HQ3 has the same\
scan line timings and color information as HQ2 but with 72 scan lines (instead\
of 128), and HQ4 is identical to HQ1 but also 72 scan lines. As each scan line\
produces two screen lines, the resolution of HQ3/4 is 144 vertical lines.\
Unfortunately, the author refused to disclose the exact specification of the system,\
so this improved system is not commonly found. However, during the time of\
its introduction, an author of WinPixPro software (Don Rotier, K0HEO) reverse-\
engineered HQ1 and HQ2 modes. Christoph Nadig, HB9ZHK used WinPixPro
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission 4\
Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution\
VIS 16-bit Color sequence Scan-line (ms) Sync Y R\'96Y B\'96Y Speed\
(lpm)\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 MP115 115 s 320\'d7256 0x2923 YCrCb 9.0 223.0 223.0 223.0 133.037694\
MP140 140 s 320\'d7256 0x2a23 YCrCb 9.0 270.0 270.0 270.0 110.091743\
MP175 175 s 320\'d7256 0x2c23 YCrCb 9.0 340.0 340.0 340.0 87.591241\
MR73 73 s 320\'d7256 0x4523 YCrCb 9.0 138.0 69.0 69.0 419.140761\
MR90 90 s 320\'d7256 0x4623 YCrCb 9.0 171.0 85.5 85.5 340.618791\
MR115 115 s 320\'d7256 0x4923 YCrCb 9.0 220.0 110.0 110.0 266.489007\
MR140 140 s 320\'d7256 0x4a23 YCrCb 9.0 269.0 134.5 134.5 218.858289\
MR175 175 s 320\'d7256 0x4c23 YCrCb 9.0 337.0 168.5 168.5 175.361683\
ML180 180 s 640\'d7496 0x8523 YCrCb 9.0 176.5 88.25 88.25 330.305533\
ML240 240 s 640\'d7496 0x8623 YCrCb 9.0 236.5 118.25 118.25 248.292986\
ML280 280 s 640\'d7496 0x8923 YCrCb 9.0 277.5 138.75 138.75 212.276667\
ML320 320 s 640\'d7496 0x8a23 YCrCb 9.0 317.5 158.75 158.75 185.960019\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Narrowband modes:\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Mode name Transfer\
time Resolution N-VIS\
Color sequence Scan-line (ms) Sync Y R\'96Y B\'96Y Speed\
(lpm)\

\fs15\fsmilli7970 MP73-N 73 s 320\'d7256 0x02 YCrCb 9.0 140.0 140.0 140.0 210.526316\
MP110-N 115 s 320\'d7256 0x04 YCrCb 9.0 212.0 212.0 212.0 139.860140\
MP140-N 140 s 320\'d7256 0x05 YCrCb 9.0 270.0 270.0 270.0 110.091743\
Sync R G B\
MC110-N 110 s 320\'d7256 0x14 R\'96G\'96B 8.0 143.0 143.0 143.0 137.142857\
MC140-N 140 s 320\'d7256 0x15 R\'96G\'96B 8.0 180.0 180.0 180.0 109.389243\
MC180-N 180 s 320\'d7256 0x16 R\'96G\'96B 8.0 232.0 232.0 232.0 85.166785\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.10: The parameters of MMSSTV modes.\
signals to implement these modes into his iDigi SSTV software for MacOS and\
thanks to that we have now specifications of all four Martin HQ modes.\
Scan line is started by two sync pulses with a gap: 6.5 ms 1200 Hz, then 4.75 ms\
2100 Hz, then 6.5 ms 1200 Hz, then 4 ms 1800 Hz (total of 21.75 ms).\
Then the video signals are sent in 4:2:2. For HQ1, luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396  is sent for\
170 ms, followed by chrominance \uc0\u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56415  for 85.75 ms and \u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56399  for 85.75 ms. This is\
followed by a gap of 0.5 ms 1500 Hz, then the information of the second screen line\
is sent: luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396  for 170 ms, followed by chrominance \u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56415  (inverted \u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56415 ) for\
85.75 ms and \uc0\u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56399  (inverted \u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56399 ) for 85.75 ms, and another gap of 0.22 ms 1500 Hz.\
HQ2 has the same composition of the scan-line, but the duration of luminance \uc0\u55349 \u56396 \
is 212.5 ms, and chrominance \uc0\u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56415  and \u55349 \u56374 \u55349 \u56399  are 106.5 ms each and back porch gaps\
are 0.429 ms.
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 4 Formats of slow-scan TV transmission\
Mode name Resolution Color sequence Sync pulse Scan-line (ms) Y Cr/Cr Cb/Cb Speed\
(lpm)\
Martin HQ1 320\'d7256 YCrCbYCrCb 21.75 170 85.75 85.75 170.09934\
Martin HQ2 320\'d7256 YCrCbYCrCb 21.75 212.5 106.5 106.5 137.35022\
Martin HQ3 320\'d7144 YCrCbYCrCb 21.75 212.5 106.5 106.6 137.35022\
Martin HQ4 320\'d7144 YCrCbYCrCb 21.75 170 85.75 85.75 170.09934\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Table 4.11: The Martin HQ parameters and scan-line timing.\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf5 2300\
Frequencyf [Hz]\
1900\
1500\
1200\
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900\
Timet [ms]\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 Two screen-lines of Martin HQ2 mode, when color\
Figure 4.12: bars are sent.}